
{{


}}





{{Infobox Continent
|title               = North America
|image               = Location North America.svg
|area                =  (3rd)
|population          = 592,296,233 (2021; 4th)
|density             = 
|GDP_PPP             =  
|GDP_nominal         = $29.01 trillion (2022 est.; 2nd)<ref></ref> 
|GDP_per_capita      = $57,410 (2022 est.; 2nd)<ref></ref>
|religions          = {{unbulleted list
 Christianity (74.6%)<ref name="pew-relig"></ref>
 No religion (19.2%)<ref name="pew-relig"/>
 Judaism (1.6%)<ref name="pew-relig"/>
 Islam (1.3%)<ref name="pew-relig"/>
 Hinduism (1.2%)<ref name="pew-relig"/>
 Other (2.1%)<ref name="pew-relig"/>
}}
| religions_year                 = 2012
| religions_ref      = <ref name="Survey"/>
|demonym             = North American
|countries           = 23 sovereign states
|list_countries      = List of sovereign states and dependent territories in North America
|dependencies        = List of sovereign states and dependent territories in North America#Non-23 non-sovereign territories
|languages           = English, Spanish, French, Dutch, Danish, indigenous languages, and many others
|time                = UTC−10:00 to UTC±00:00
|cities              = List of urban areas:<ref>
|m49 = <code>003</code> – North America<br /><code>019</code> – Americas<br /><code>001</code> – World
}}


North America is a continent in the Northern Hemisphere almost entirely within the Western Hemisphere. North America is bordered to the north by the Arctic Ocean, to the east by the Atlantic Ocean, to the southeast by South America and the Caribbean Sea, and to the west and south by the Pacific Ocean. The region includes Canada, the Caribbean, Central America, Greenland, Mexico, and the United States.

North America covers an area of about </ref>

The first human populations reached North America during the Last Glacial Period approximately 20,000 to 17,000 years ago, during which they crossed the Bering land bridge in the Bering Strait on their way to reaching North America. The Paleo-Paleo-Indian period in North America followed the Last Glacial Period, and lasted until about 10,000 years ago when the Archaic period began. The classic stage followed the Archaic period, and lasted from approximately the 6th to 13th centuries. Beginning in 1000 AD, the Norse were the first Europeans to begin exploring and ultimately colonizing areas of North America. 

In 1492, the exploratory voyages of Christopher Columbus led to a transatlantic exchange, including migrations of European settlers during the Age of Discovery and the early modern period. Present-day cultural and ethnic patterns reflect interactions between European colonists, indigenous peoples, African slaves, immigrants from Europe, Asia, and descendants of these respective groups.

Europe's colonization in North America led to most North Americans speaking European languages, including English, Spanish, and French, and the cultures of the region commonly reflect Western traditions. However, relatively small parts of North America in Canada, the United States, Mexico, and Central America have indigenous populations that continue adhering to their respective pre-European colonial cultural and linguistic traditions.

 Name 



The Americas were named after the Italian explorer Amerigo Vespucci by German cartographers Martin Waldseemüller and Matthias Ringmann.<ref></ref>

Waldseemüller used the Latin version of Vespucci's name, Americus Vespucius, in its feminine form of "America", following the examples of "Europa", "Asia", and "Africa". Map makers later extended the name America to North America.

In 1538, Gerardus Mercator used the term America on his world map of the entire Western Hemisphere.<ref name="Cohen"></ref> 

The Spanish Empire called its territories in North and South America "Las Indias", and the name given to the state body that oversaw the region was called the Council of the Indies.

 <span id="Usage of the term">Definitions</span> 

The United Nations and its statistics division recognize North America as including three regions: Northern America, Central America, and the Caribbean.<ref></ref> "Northern America" is a distinct term from "North America", excluding Central America, which itself may or may not include Mexico. In the limited context of regional trade agreements, the term is used to reference three nations, Canada, the United States, and Mexico.

France, Italy, Portugal, Spain, Romania, Greece, and the countries of Latin America use a six-continent model, with the Americas viewed as a single continent and North America designating a subcontinent comprising Canada, the United States, Mexico, and Saint Pierre and Miquelon (politically part of France), and often including Greenland and Bermuda.<ref></ref>

North America has historically been known by other names, including Spanish North America, New Spain, and Northern America,</ref>

Regions===

North America includes several regions and subregions, each of which have their own respective cultural, economic, and geographic regions. Economic regions include several regions formalized in 20th and 21st century trade agreements, including NAFTA between Canada, Mexico, and the United States, and Dominican Republic–CAFTA between Central America, the Dominican Republic, and the United States. 

North America is divided linguistically and culturally into two primary regions, Anglo-America and Latin America. Anglo-America includes most of North America, Belize, and Caribbean islands with English-speaking populations, though subnational entities, including Louisiana and Quebec, have large Francophone populations; in Quebec, French is the official language.<ref name="language"></ref>.

The southern portion of North America includes Central America and non-English speaking Caribbean nations.<ref name="BritannicaCA"></ref>

The term Northern America refers to the northernmost countries and territories of North America: the U.S., Bermuda, Canada, Greenland, and St. Pierre and Miquelon.<ref></ref>

North America's largest countries by land area are Canada and the U.S., both of which have well-defined and recognized subregions. In Canada, these include (from east to west) Atlantic Canada, Central Canada, Canadian Prairies, the British Columbia Coast, and Northern Canada. In the U.S., they include New England, the Mid-Mid-Atlantic, South Atlantic states, East North Central states, West North Central states, East South Central states, West South Central states, Mountain states, and Pacific states. The Great Lakes region and the Pacific Northwest include areas in both Canada and the U.S.

 Countries, dependencies, and other territories 

{| class="wikitable sortable" style="float:center; text-align:center; white-space:nowrap"
|-
! class="unsortable" Arms
! class="unsortable" style="width:20px" Flag
! Country / Territory<ref name="spp"></ref>
! Area<ref>Unless otherwise noted, land area figures are taken from </ref>
! Population<br/>(
! Population<br/> density
! Capital
! Name(s) in official language(s)
! ISO 3166-1 alpha-ISO 3166-1
|-
| 
| 
| Anguilla<br/>(United Kingdom)
| style="text-align:right;"| 
| style="text-align:right;"| 
| style="text-align:right;"| 
| The Valley,The Valley
| Anguilla
| AIA
|-
| 
| 
| Antigua and Barbuda
| style="text-align:right;"| 
| style="text-align:right;"| 
| style="text-align:right;"| 
| St. John's,St. John's
| Antigua and Barbuda
| ATG
|-
| 
| 
| Aruba<br/>(Kingdom of the Netherlands)
| style="text-align:right;"| 
| style="text-align:right;"| 
| style="text-align:right;"| 
| Oranjestad,Oranjestad
| Aruba
| ABW
|-
| 
| 
| The Bahamas
| style="text-align:right;"| 
| style="text-align:right;"| 
| style="text-align:right;"| 
| Nassau,Nassau
| Bahamas
| BHS
|-
| 
| 
| Barbados
| style="text-align:right;"| 
| style="text-align:right;"| 
| style="text-align:right;"| 
| Bridgetown
| Barbados
| BRB
|-
| 
| 
| Belize
| style="text-align:right;"| 
| style="text-align:right;"| 
| style="text-align:right;"| 
| Belmopan
| Belize
| BLZ
|-
| 
| 
| Bermuda<br/>(United Kingdom)
| style="text-align:right;"| 
| style="text-align:right;"| 
| style="text-align:right;"| 
| Hamilton,Hamilton
| Bermuda
| BMU
|-
| 
| 
| Bonaire<br/>(Kingdom of the Netherlands)</ref>
| style="text-align:right;"| 
| style="text-align:right;"| 12,093
| style="text-align:right;"| 
| Kralendijk
| Boneiru
| BES
|-
| 
| 
| British Virgin Islands<br/>(United Kingdom)
| style="text-align:right;"| 
| style="text-align:right;"| 
| style="text-align:right;"| 
| Road Town
| British Virgin Islands
| VGB
|-
| 
| 
| Canada
| style="text-align:right;"| 
| style="text-align:right;"| 
| style="text-align:right;"| 
| Ottawa
| Canada
| CAN
|-
| 
| 
| Cayman Islands<br/>(United Kingdom)
| style="text-align:right;"| 
| style="text-align:right;"| 
| style="text-align:right;"| 
| George Town,George Town
| Cayman Islands
| CYM
|-
| 
| 
| Clipperton Island (France)
| style="text-align:right;"| 
| style="text-align:right;"| 0
| style="text-align:right;"| 
| —
| Île de Clipperton
| CPT
|-
| 
| 
| Costa Rica
| style="text-align:right;"| 
| style="text-align:right;"| 
| style="text-align:right;"| 
| San José,San José
| Costa Rica
| CRI
|-
| 
| 
| Cuba
| style="text-align:right;"| 
| style="text-align:right;"| 
| style="text-align:right;"| 
| Havana
| Cuba
| CUB
|-
| 
| 
| Curaçao<br/>(Kingdom of the Netherlands)
| style="text-align:right;"| 
| style="text-align:right;"| 
| style="text-align:right;"| 
| Willemstad
| Kòrsou
| CUW
|-
| 
| 
| Dominica
| style="text-align:right;"| 
| style="text-align:right;"| 
| style="text-align:right;"| 
| Roseau
| Dominica
| DMA
|-
| 
| 
| Dominican Republic
| style="text-align:right;"| 
| style="text-align:right;"| 
| style="text-align:right;"| 
| Santo Domingo
| República Dominicana
| DOM
|-
| 
| 
| El Salvador
| style="text-align:right;"| 
| style="text-align:right;"| 
| style="text-align:right;"| 
| San Salvador
| El Salvador
| SLV
|-
| 
| 
| Federal Dependencies of Venezuela<br/>(Venezuela)
| style="text-align:right;"| 
| style="text-align:right;"| 2,155
| style="text-align:right;"| 
| Gran Roque
| Dependencias Federales de Venezuela
| VEN-W
|-
| 
| 
| Greenland<br/>(Kingdom of Denmark)
| style="text-align:right;"| 
| style="text-align:right;"| 
| style="text-align:right;"| 
| Nuuk
| Kalaallit Nunaat/Grønland
| GRL
|-
| 
| 
| Grenada
| style="text-align:right;"| 
| style="text-align:right;"| 
| style="text-align:right;"| 
| St. George's,St. George's
| Gwinàd
| GRD
|-
| 
| 
| Guadeloupe<br/>(France)
| style="text-align:right;"| 
| style="text-align:right;"| 
| style="text-align:right;"| 
| Basse-Terre
| Gwadloup
| GLP
|-
| 
| 
| Guatemala
| style="text-align:right;"| 
| style="text-align:right;"| 
| style="text-align:right;"| 
| Guatemala City
| Guatemala
| GTM
|-
| 
| 
| Haiti
| style="text-align:right;"| 
| style="text-align:right;"| 
| style="text-align:right;"| 
| Port-au-Prince
| Ayiti/Haïti
| HTI
|-
| 
| 
| Honduras
| style="text-align:right;"| 
| style="text-align:right;"| 
| style="text-align:right;"| 
| Tegucigalpa
| Honduras
| HND
|-
| 
| 
| Jamaica
| style="text-align:right;"| 
| style="text-align:right;"| 
| style="text-align:right;"| 
| Kingston,Kingston
| Jumieka
| JAM
|-
| 
| 
| Martinique<br/>(France)
| style="text-align:right;"| 
| style="text-align:right;"| 
| style="text-align:right;"| 
| Fort-de-France
| Martinique/Matinik
| MTQ
|-
| 
| 
| Mexico
| style="text-align:right;"| 
| style="text-align:right;"| 
| style="text-align:right;"| 
| Mexico City
| México
| MEX
|-
| 
| 
| Montserrat<br/>(United Kingdom)
| style="text-align:right;"| 
| style="text-align:right;"| 
| style="text-align:right;"| 
| Plymouth,Plymouth,<br/>Brades,Brades
| Montserrat
| MSR
|-
| 
| 
| Nicaragua
| style="text-align:right;"| 
| style="text-align:right;"| 
| style="text-align:right;"| 
| Managua
| Nicaragua
| NIC
|-
| 
| 
| Nueva Esparta<br/>(Venezuela)
| style="text-align:right;"| 
| style="text-align:right;"| 491,610
| style="text-align:right;"| 
| La Asunción
| Nueva Esparta
| VEN-O
|-
| 
| 
| Panama
| style="text-align:right;"| 
| style="text-align:right;"| 
| style="text-align:right;"| 
| Panama City
| Panamá
| PAN
|-
| 
| 
| Puerto Rico<br/>(United States)
| style="text-align:right;"| 
| style="text-align:right;"| 
| style="text-align:right;"| 
| San Juan,San Juan
| Puerto Rico
| PRI
|-
| 
| 
| Saba<br/>(Kingdom of the Netherlands)<ref name="nethant" />
| style="text-align:right;"| 
| style="text-align:right;"| 1,537
| style="text-align:right;"| 
| The Bottom
| Saba
| BES
|-
| 
| 
| Archipelago of San Andrés,San Andrés and Providencia<br/>(Colombia)
| style="text-align:right;"| 
| style="text-align:right;"| 77,701
| style="text-align:right;"| 
| San Andrés,San Andrés
| San Andrés
| COL-SAP
|-
| 
| 
| Saint Barthélemy<br/>(France)<ref name="popcia">These population estimates are for 2010, and are taken from </ref>
| style="text-align:right;"| </ref>
| style="text-align:right;"| 7,448
| style="text-align:right;"| 
| Gustavia,Gustavia
| Saint-Barthélemy
| BLM
|-
| 
| 
| Saint Kitts and Nevis
| style="text-align:right;"| 
| style="text-align:right;"| 
| style="text-align:right;"| 
| Basseterre
| Saint Kitts and Nevis
| KNA
|-
| 
| 
| Saint Lucia
| style="text-align:right;"| 
| style="text-align:right;"| 
| style="text-align:right;"| 
| Castries
| Sainte-Lucie
| LCA
|-
| 
| 
| Saint Martin<br/>(France)<ref name="popcia" />
| style="text-align:right;"| <ref name="areacia" />
| style="text-align:right;"| 29,820
| style="text-align:right;"| 
| Marigot, St.Marigot
| Saint-Martin
| MAF
|-
| 
| 
| Saint Pierre and Miquelon<br/>(France)
| style="text-align:right;"| 
| style="text-align:right;"| 
| style="text-align:right;"| 
| Saint-Pierre,Saint-Pierre
| Saint-Pierre-et-Miquelon
| SPM
|-
| 
| 
| Saint Vincent and the Grenadines
| style="text-align:right;"| 
| style="text-align:right;"| 
| style="text-align:right;"| 
| Kingstown
| Saint Vincent and the Grenadines
| VCT
|-
| 
| 
| Sint Eustatius<br/>(Kingdom of the Netherlands)<ref name="nethant" />
| style="text-align:right;"| 
| style="text-align:right;"| 2,739
| style="text-align:right;"| 
| Oranjestad,Oranjestad
| Sint Eustatius
| BES
|-
| 
| 
| Sint Maarten<br/>(Kingdom of the Netherlands)
| style="text-align:right;"| 
| style="text-align:right;"| 
| style="text-align:right;"| 
| Philipsburg,Philipsburg
| Sint Maarten
| SXM
|-
| 
| 
| Trinidad and Tobago
| style="text-align:right;"| 
| style="text-align:right;"| 
| style="text-align:right;"| 
| Port of Spain
| Trinidad and Tobago
| TTO
|-
| 
| 
| Turks and Caicos Islands<br/>(United Kingdom)
| style="text-align:right;"| 
| style="text-align:right;"| 
| style="text-align:right;"| 
| Grand Turk (Cockburn Town)
| Turks and Caicos Islands
| TCA
|-
|
| 
| United States
| style="text-align:right;"| 
| style="text-align:right;"| 
| style="text-align:right;"| 
| Washington, D.C.
| United States of America
| USA
|-
| 
| 
| United States Virgin Islands<br/>(United States)
| style="text-align:right;"| 
| style="text-align:right;"| 
| style="text-align:right;"| 
| Charlotte Amalie,Charlotte Amalie
| US Virgin Islands
| VIR
|- class="sortbottom"
! colspan="3"| Total
! style="text-align:left;"| 
! style="text-align:left;"| 
! style="text-align:left;"| 
! colspan="3"|
|}

 Natural characteristics 
 <span id="Geography and extent">Geography</span> 





North America occupies the northern portion of the landmass generally referred to as the New World, the Western Hemisphere, the Americas, or simply America, which, in many countries, is considered a single continent<ref name="IOC">{{cite web
url         = http://multimedia.olympic.org/pdf/en_report_672.pdf
title       = The Olympic symbols
publisher   = International Olympic Committee
year        = 2002
archive-url  = https://web.archive.org/web/20080307073846/http://multimedia.olympic.org/pdf/en_report_672.pdf
archive-date = 7 March 2008
|location    = Lausanne: Olympic Museum and Studies Centre
}} The five rings of the Olympic flag represent the five inhabited, participating continents ([http://www.moscow2001.olympic.org/en/pdf/members_by_continent.pdf Africa, America, Asia, Europe, and Oceania] </ref> 

North America's only land connection to South America is in present-day Panama at the Darien Gap on the Colombia-Panama border, placing almost all of Panama within North America.<ref></ref> The Caribbean islands, or West Indies, are considered part of North America.<ref name=britannica-northamerica/> The continental coastline is long and irregular. The Gulf of Mexico is the largest body of water indenting the continent, followed by Hudson Bay. Others include the Gulf of Saint Lawrence and the Gulf of California.

Before the Central American isthmus formed, the region had been underwater. The islands of the West Indies delineate a submerged former land bridge, which had connected North and South America via what are now Florida and Venezuela.

There are several islands off the continent's coasts; principally, the Arctic Archipelago, the Bahamas, Turks & Caicos, the Greater and Lesser Antilles, the Aleutian Islands (some of which are in the Eastern Hemisphere proper), the Alexander Archipelago, the many thousand islands of the British Columbia Coast, and Newfoundland. Greenland, a self-governing Danish island, and the world's largest, is on the same tectonic plate (the North American Plate) and is part of North America geographically. In a geologic sense, Bermuda is not part of the Americas, but an oceanic island that was formed on the fissure of the Mid-Atlantic Ridge over 100 million years ago (mya). The nearest landmass to it is Cape Hatteras, North Carolina. However, Bermuda is often thought of as part of North America, especially given its historical, political and cultural ties to Virginia and other parts of the continent.

The vast majority of North America is on the North American Plate. Parts of western Mexico, including Baja California, and of California, including the cities of San Diego, Los Angeles, and Santa Cruz,Santa Cruz, lie on the eastern edge of the Pacific Plate, with the two plates meeting along the San Andreas fault. The southernmost portion of the continent and much of the West Indies lie on the Caribbean Plate, whereas the Juan de Fuca and Cocos plates border the North American Plate on its western frontier.

The continent can be divided into four great regions (each of which contains many subregions): the Great Plains stretching from the Gulf of Mexico to the Canadian Arctic; the geologically young, mountainous west, including the Rocky Mountains, the Great Basin, California and Alaska; the raised but relatively flat plateau of the Canadian Shield in the northeast; and the varied eastern region, which includes the Appalachian Mountains, the coastal plain along the Atlantic seaboard, and the Florida peninsula. Mexico, with its long plateaus and cordilleras, falls largely in the western region, although the eastern coastal plain does extend south along the Gulf.

The western mountains are split in the middle into the main range of the Rockies and the coast ranges in California, Oregon, Washington, and British Columbia, with the Great Basin—a lower area containing smaller ranges and low-lying deserts—in between. The highest peak is Denali in Alaska.

The U.S. Geographical Survey (USGS) states that the geographic center of North America is "6 miles [10 km] west of Balta,Balta, Pierce County, North Dakota" at about </ref>

 Geology 

 Geologic history 

Laurentia is an ancient craton which forms the geologic core of North America; it formed between 1.5 and 1.0 billion years ago during the Proterozoic eon.<ref></ref> and the Great Lakes (as well as many other northern freshwater lakes and rivers) were carved by receding glaciers about 10,000 years ago.

North America is the source of much of what humanity knows about geologic time periods.<ref name="dinopedia-american" /> The geographic area that would later become the United States has been the source of more varieties of dinosaurs than any other modern country.<ref name="dinopedia-american" /> According to paleontologist Peter Dodson, this is primarily due to stratigraphy, climate and geography, human resources, and history.<ref name="dinopedia-american"/> Much of the Mesozoic Era is represented by exposed outcrops in the many arid regions of the continent.<ref name="dinopedia-american"></ref>

 Canada 


Canada is geographically one of the oldest regions in the world, with more than half of the region consisting of Precambrian rocks that have been above sea level since the beginning of the Palaeozoic era.<ref name="Marianopolis"></ref> The Shield is also covered by vast boreal forests that support an important logging industry.

 United States 

The lower 48 U.S. states can be divided into roughly five physiographic provinces:
# The American cordillera
# The Canadian Shield<ref name="Marianopolis"/> Northern portion of the upper midwestern U.S.
# The stable platform
# The coastal plain
# The Appalachian orogenic belt

The geology of Alaska is typical of that of the cordillera, while the major islands of Hawaii consist of Neogene volcanics erupted over a hot spot.

{{multiple image
 align     = right
 direction = horizontal
 header    
 header_align = left/right/center
 header_background 
 footer    
 footer_background 
 width     
 image1    = North america terrain 2003 map.jpg
 width1    = 180
 caption1  = A 2003 image of North America's bedrock and terrain
 image2    = North america basement rocks.png
 width2    = 180
 caption2  = A 2015 map of North America's cratons and basement rocks
}}

 Central America 


Central America is geologically active with volcanic eruptions and earthquakes occurring from time to time. In 1976 Guatemala was hit by a major earthquake, killing 23,000 people; Managua, the capital of Nicaragua, was devastated by earthquakes in 1931 and 1972, the last one killing about 5,000 people; three earthquakes devastated El Salvador, one in 1986 and two in 2001; one earthquake devastated northern and central Costa Rica in 2009, killing at least 34 people; in Honduras a powerful earthquake killed seven people in 2009.

Volcanic eruptions are common in the region. In 1968 the Arenal Volcano, in Costa Rica, erupted and killed 87 people. Fertile soils from weathered volcanic lavas have made it possible to sustain dense populations in agriculturally productive highland areas.

Central America has many mountain ranges; the longest are the Sierra Madre de Chiapas, the Cordillera Isabelia, and the Cordillera de Talamanca. Between the mountain ranges lie fertile valleys that are suitable for the people; in fact, most of the population of Honduras, Costa Rica, and Guatemala live in valleys. Valleys are also suitable for the production of coffee, beans, and other crops.

 Climate 

North America is a very large continent that extends from north of the Arctic Circle to south of the Tropic of Cancer. Greenland, along with the Canadian Shield, is tundra with average temperatures ranging from , but central Greenland is composed of a very large ice sheet. This tundra radiates throughout Canada, but its border ends near the Rocky Mountains (but still contains Alaska) and at the end of the Canadian Shield, near the Great Lakes.
Climate west of the Cascade Range is described as being temperate weather with average precipitation </ref>
Climate in coastal California is described to be Mediterranean, with average temperatures in cities like San Francisco ranging from </ref>

Stretching from the East Coast to eastern North Dakota, and stretching down to Kansas, is the humid continental climate featuring intense seasons, with a large amount of annual precipitation, with places like New York City averaging </ref>
Starting at the southern border of the humid continental climate and stretching to the Gulf of Mexico (whilst encompassing the eastern half of Texas) is the humid subtropical climate. This area has the wettest cities in the contiguous U.S., with annual precipitation reaching </ref>
Stretching from the borders of the humid continental and subtropical climates, and going west to the Sierra Nevada, south to the southern tip of Durango, north to the border with tundra climate, the semi-steppe/desert climates are the driest in the United States.<ref></ref> Precipitation patterns vary across the region, and as such rainforest, monsoon, and savanna types can be found, with rains and high temperatures throughout the year.

 Ecology 


Notable North American fauna include the bison, black bear, jaguar, cougar, prairie dog, turkey, pronghorn, raccoon, coyote, and monarch butterfly.

Notable plants that were domesticated in North America include tobacco, maize, squash, tomato, sunflower, blueberry, avocado, cotton, chile pepper, and vanilla.

 History 

 Pre-Columbian era

, including North America, as of 1000&nbsp;BCE




The indigenous peoples of the Americas have many creation myths by which they assert that they have been present on the land since its creation,<ref name="Curtin2014"></ref>

Prior to the arrival of European explorers and colonists in North America, the Paleo-natives of North America were divided into many different polities, ranging from small bands of a few families to large empires. They lived in several culture areas, which roughly correspond to geographic and biological zones that defined the representative cultures and lifestyles of the indigenous people who lived there, including the bison hunter-hunters of the Great Plains and the farmers of Mesoamerica. Native groups also are classified by their language families, which included Athapascan and Uto-Uto-Aztecan languages. Indigenous peoples with similar languages did not always share the same material culture, however, and were not necessarily always allies. Anthropologists speculate that the Inuit of the high Arctic arrived in North America much later than other native groups, evidenced by the disappearance of Dorset culture artifacts from the archaeological record and their replacement by the Thule people.

During the thousands of years of native habitation on the continent, cultures changed and shifted. One of the oldest yet discovered is the Clovis culture (c.&nbsp;9550–9050&nbsp;BCE) in modern New Mexico.<ref name=bradshaw/> Later groups include the Mississippian culture and related Mound building cultures, found in the Mississippi River valley and the Pueblo culture of what is now the Four Corners. The more southern cultural groups of North America were responsible for the domestication of many common crops now used around the world, such as tomatoes, squash, and maize. As a result of the development of agriculture in the south, many other cultural advances were made there. The Mayans developed a writing system, built huge pyramids and temples, had a complex calendar, and developed the concept of zero around 400&nbsp;CE.<ref></ref>

The first recorded European references to North America are in Norse sagas where it is referred to as Vinland.<ref></ref>

The Mayan culture was still present in southern Mexico and Guatemala when the Spanish conquistadors arrived, but political dominance in the area had shifted to the Aztec Empire, whose capital city Tenochtitlan was located further north in the Valley of Mexico. The Aztecs were conquered in 1521 by Hernán Cortés.<ref name="Grunberg">Bernard Grunberg, "La folle aventure d'Hernan Cortés", in L'Histoire n°322, July–August 2007 </ref>

 Post-contact, 1492–1910 



During the so-called Age of Discovery, Europeans explored overseas and staked claims to various parts of North America, much of which was already settled by indigenous peoples. Upon Europeans' arrival in the "New World", indigenous peoples had a variety of reactions, including curiosity, trading, cooperation, resignation, and resistance. The indigenous population declined substantially following European arrival, primarily due to the introduction of Eurasian diseases, such as smallpox, to which the indigenous peoples lacked immunity, and because of violent conflicts with Europeans.<ref></ref> Indigenous culture changed significantly and their affiliation with political and cultural groups also changed. Several linguistic groups died out, and others changed quite quickly.

On the North America's southeastern coast, Spanish explorer Juan Ponce de León, who had accompanied Columbus's second voyage, visited and named in 1513 La Florida.<ref></ref> As the colonial period unfolded, Spain, England, and France appropriated and claimed extensive territories in North America eastern and southern coastlines. Spain established permanent settlements on the Caribbean islands of Hispaniola and Cuba in the 1490s, building cities, putting the resident indigenous populations to work, raising crops for Spanish settlers and panning gold to enrich the Spaniards. Much of the indigenous population died due to disease and overwork, spurring the Spaniards on to claim new lands and peoples. An expedition under the command of Spanish settler, Hernán Cortés, sailed westward in 1519 to what turned out to be the mainland in Mexico. With local indigenous allies, the Spanish conquered the Aztec empire in central Mexico in 1521. Spain then established permanent cities in Mexico, Central America, and Spanish South America in the sixteenth century. Once Spaniards conquered the high civilization of the Aztecs and Incas, the Caribbean was a backwater of the Spanish empire.

Other European powers began to intrude on areas claimed by Spain, including the Caribbean islands. France took the western half of Hispaniola and developed Saint-Domingue as a cane sugar producing colony worked by black slave labor. Britain took Barbados and Jamaica, and the Dutch and Danes took islands previously claimed by Spain. Britain did not begin settling on the North American mainland until a hundred years after the first Spanish settlements, since it sought first to control nearby Ireland. 

English settlements

The first permanent English settlement was in Jamestown, Virginia in 1607, followed by additional colonial establishments on the east coast from present-day Georgia (U.S.Georgia in the south to Massachusetts in the north, forming the Thirteen Colonies of British America. The English did not establish settlements north or east of the St.St. Lawrence Valley in present-day Canada until after the conclusion of the American Revolutionary War. Britain's early settlements in present-day Canada included St. John's,St. John's, Newfoundland in 1630 and Halifax, Nova Scotia in 1749. The first permanent French settlement was in Quebec City, Quebec in 1608

Seven Years' War

With the British victory in the Seven Years' War, France in 1763 ceded to Britain its claims of North American territories east of the Mississippi River. Spain, in turn, gained rights to the territories west of Mississippi, which then served as a border between Spain and Britain's territorial claims. French colonists settled Illinois Country after several generations of experience on North America, migrating over the Mississippi River to regions where Spain was not present and where they were able to leverage their earlier Louisiana French settlements around the Gulf of Mexico. These early French settlers partnered with midwest indigenous tribes, and their mixed ancestry descendants later followed a westward expansion all the way to the Pacific Ocean on the present-day U.S. West Coast.

American Revolution

In 1776, after various attempts to reconcile differences with the British, the Thirteen Colonies in British America sent delegates to the Second Continental Congress in Philadelphia, who unanimously adopted the Declaration of Independence on July 4, 1776, written primarily by Thomas Jefferson, a member of the Committee of Five charged by the Second Continental Congress with authoring it. In the Declaration, the thirteen colonies declared their independence from the British monarchy, then governed by King George III, and detailed the factors that contributed to their decision. With the signing and issuance of the Declaration of Independence, the thirteen colonies formalized and escalated the American Revolutionary War, which had begun the year before at the Battles of Lexington and Concord on April 19, 1775. Gathered in Philadelphia following the war's outbreak, delegates from the thirteen colonies established the Continental Army from various patriot militias then engaged in resisting the British, and appointed George Washington as the Continental Army's military commander.

As the American Revolutionary War progressed, France and Spain, both then enemies of Britain, began to ultimately see the promise of a potential American victory in the war and began supporting Washington and the American Revolutionary cause. The British Army, in turn, was supported by Hessian military units from present-day Germany. 

In 1783, after an eight-year attempt to defeat the American rebellion, King George III acknowledged Britain's defeat in the war, leading to the signing of the Treaty of Paris on September 3, 1783, which solidified the sovereign establishment of the United States.

Westward expansion


By the late 18th century, Russia was established on the Pacific Northwest northern coastline, where it was engaged in maritime fur trade and was supported by various indigenous settlements in the region. As a result, the Spanish were showing more interest in controlling the trade on the Pacific coast and mapped most of its coastline. The first Spanish settlements were attempted in Alta California during that period. Numerous overland explorations associated with voyageurs, fur trade, and U.S. led expeditions, including the Lewis and Clark, John C.Fremont and Wilkes expeditions, reached the Pacific. 

In 1803, during the presidency of Thomas Jefferson, the third U.S. president, Napoleon Bonaparte sold France's remaining North American territorial claims, which included regions west of the Mississippi River, to the U.S., in the Louisiana Purchase. Spain and the U.S. settled their western boundary dispute in 1819 in the Adams–Onís Treaty. Mexico fought a lengthy war for independence from Spain, winning it for Mexico (which included Central America at the time) in 1821. The U.S. sought further westward expansion and fought the Mexican–American War, gaining a vast territory that first Spain and then Mexico claimed but which they did not effectively control. Much of the area was in fact dominated by indigenous peoples, which did not recognize the claims of Spain, France, or the U.S. Russia sold its North American claims, which included the present-day U.S. state of Alaska, to the U.S in 1867.

Canada and Panama Canal

In 1867, colonial settlers north of the United States, unified as the dominion of Canada. The U.S. sought to dig a canal across the Isthmus of Panama in present-day Panama in Central America, then a part of present-day Colombia. The U.S. aided Panamanians in a war that resulted in its separation from Colombia. The U.S. subsequently carved out the Panama Canal Zone, and claimed sovereignty over it. After decades of work, the Panama Canal was completed, which connected the Atlantic and Pacific oceans in 1913 and greatly facilitated global shipping navigation.

Demographics==


Canada and the United States are the wealthiest and most developed nations on the continent followed by Mexico, a newly industrialized country.<ref name="AIA" /> The countries of Central America and the Caribbean are at various levels of economic and human development. For example, small Caribbean island-nations, such as Barbados, Trinidad and Tobago, and Antigua and Barbuda, have a higher GDP (PPP) per capita than Mexico due to their smaller populations. Panama and Costa Rica have a significantly higher Human Development Index and GDP than the rest of the Central American nations.<ref name="UNDP"></ref>

Demographically, North America is ethnically diverse. Its three main groups are Whites, Mestizos and Blacks.<ref name=Composed></ref> There is a significant minority of Indigenous Americans and Asians among other less numerous groups.<ref name=Composed/>

 Languages 


The dominant languages in North America are English, Spanish, and French. Danish is prevalent in Greenland alongside Greenlandic, and Dutch is spoken side by side local languages in the Dutch Caribbean. The term Anglo-America is used to refer to the anglophone countries of the Americas: namely Canada (where English and French are co-official) and the U.S., but also sometimes Belize and parts of the tropics, especially the Commonwealth Caribbean. Latin America refers to the other areas of the Americas (generally south of the U.S.) where the Romance languages, derived from Latin, of Spanish and Portuguese, (but French-speaking countries are not usually included) predominate: the other republics of Central America (but not always Belize), part of the Caribbean (not the Dutch-, English-, or French-speaking areas), Mexico, and most of South America (except Guyana, Suriname, French Guiana [France], and the Falkland Islands [UK]).

The French language has historically played a significant role in North America and now retains a distinctive presence in some regions. Canada is officially bilingual. French is the official language of the Province of Quebec, where 95% of the people speak it as either their first or second language, and it is co-official with English in the Province of New Brunswick. Other French-speaking locales include the Province of Ontario (the official language is English, but there are an estimated 600,000 Franco-Ontarians), the Province of Manitoba (co-official as de jure with English), the French West Indies and Saint-Pierre et Miquelon, as well as the U.S. state of Louisiana, where French is also an official language. Haiti is included with this group based on historical association but Haitians speak both Creole and French. Similarly, French and French Antillean Creole is spoken in Saint Lucia and the Commonwealth of Dominica alongside English.

A significant number of Indigenous languages are spoken in North America, with 372,000 people in the U.S. speaking an indigenous language at home,<ref></ref>

 Religions 



Christianity is the largest religion in the United States, Canada, and Mexico. According to a 2012 Pew Research Center survey, 77% of the population considered themselves Christians.<ref>[http://www.pewforum.org/files/2014/01/global-religion-full.pdf The Global Religious Landscape A Report on the Size and Distribution of the World's Major Religious Groups as of 2010] </ref>

According to the same study, the religiously unaffiliated (including agnostics and atheists) make up about 17% of the population of Canada and the U.S.<ref name="Religiously Unaffiliated"></ref>

Canada, the U.S. and Mexico host communities of Jews (6 million or about 1.8%),<ref></ref>

The predominant religion in Mexico and Central America is Christianity (96%).<ref name="Christianity in its Global Context"></ref> Beginning with the Spanish colonization of Mexico in the 16th century, Roman Catholicism was the only religion permitted by Spanish crown and Catholic church. A vast campaign of religious conversion, the so-called "spiritual conquest", was launched to bring the indigenous peoples into the Christian fold. The Inquisition was established to assure orthodox belief and practice. The Catholic Church remained an important institution, so that even after political independence, Roman Catholicism remained the dominant religion. Since the 1960s, there has been an increase in other Christian groups, particularly Protestantism, as well as other religious organizations, and individuals identifying themselves as having no religion. Christianity is also the predominant religion in the Caribbean (85%).<ref name="Christianity in its Global Context"/> Other religious groups in the region are Hinduism, Islam, Rastafari (in Jamaica), and Afro-American religions such as Santería and Vodou.

 Populace 

{{multiple image
| align             = right
| direction         = vertical
| caption_align     = center
| header            = North American cities
| header_align      = left/right/center
| header_background = 
| footer            = 
| footer_background = 
| width             = 
| image1            = Mexico City Reforma skyline (cropped).jpg
| width1            = 200
| caption1          = Mexico City
| image2            = 
| width2            = 200
| caption2          = New York City
| image3            = Los Angeles with Mount Baldy.jpg
| width3            = 200
| caption3          = Los Angeles
| image4            = Downtown Toronto in September 2018 (Early Sunday Morning, view from a kayak).jpg
| width4            = 200
| caption4          = Toronto
| image5            = Chicago-00.jpg
| width5            = 200
| caption5          = Chicago
| image6            = Luchtfoto van Lower Manhattan.jpg
| width6            = 200
| caption6          = New York City
| image7            = Zapopan Guadalajara Mexico 2 (cropped).jpg
| width7            = 200
| caption7          = Guadalajara
| total_width       = 
}}

North America is the fourth most populous continent after Asia, Africa, and Europe.<ref></ref>

While the U.S., Canada, and Mexico maintain the largest populations, large city populations are not restricted to those nations. There are also large cities in the Caribbean. The largest cities in North America, by far, are Mexico City and New York City. These cities are the only cities on the continent to exceed eight million, and two of three in the Americas. Next in size are Los Angeles, Toronto,<ref></ref>

Eight of the top ten metropolitan areas are located in the U.S. These metropolitan areas all have a population of above 5.5 million and include the New York City metropolitan area, Los Angeles metropolitan area, Chicago metropolitan area, and the Dallas–Fort Worth metroplex.<ref name="PopEstCBSA"></ref>


North America has also been witness to the growth of megapolitan areas. In the U.S. exists eleven megaregions that transcend international borders and comprise Canadian and Mexican metropolitan regions. These are the Arizona Sun Corridor, Cascadia, Florida, Front Range, Great Lakes Megalopolis, Gulf Coast, Northeast, Northern California, Piedmont Atlantic, Southern California, and the Texas Triangle.<ref>Hagler, Yoav (2009). "Defining U.S. Megaregions." New York: Regional Plan Association.</ref>

{| class="sortable wikitable" class="wikitable"
|+ The top ten largest North American metropolitan areas by population as of 2013, based on national census numbers from the U.S. and census estimates from Canada and Mexico
|-
| Metro Area
| Population
| Area
| Country
|- style="vertical-align: top; text-align: left;"
| Mexico City
| 21,163,226<sup>†</sup>
| 
| Mexico
|- style="vertical-align: top; text-align: left;"
| New York City
| 19,949,502
| 
| United States
|- style="vertical-align: top; text-align: left;"
| Los Angeles
| 13,131,431
| 
| United States
|- style="vertical-align: top; text-align: left;"
| Chicago
| 9,537,289
| 
| United States
|- style="vertical-align: top; text-align: left;"
| Dallas–Dallas–Fort Worth
| 6,810,913
| 
| United States
|- style="vertical-align: top; text-align: left;"
| Houston
| 6,313,158
| 
| United States
|- style="vertical-align: top; text-align: left;"
| Toronto
| 6,054,191<sup>†</sup>
| 
| Canada
|- style="vertical-align: top; text-align: left;"
| Philadelphia
| 6,034,678
| 
| United States
|- style="vertical-align: top; text-align: left;"
| Washington, D.C.Washington, DC
| 5,949,859
| 
| United States
|- style="vertical-align: top; text-align: left;"
| Miami
| 5,828,191
| 
| United States
|}
<small><sup>†</sup>2011 Census figures</small>


 Economy 




{| class="wikitable" style="text-align: right; float:right; border:1px solid #aaa; margin:10px"
|- style="background:#dbdbdb;"
! Rank
! Country or territory
! GDP<ref name="IMF Data"></ref> <small>(PPP, peak year)</small><br /><small>millions of USD</small>
! Peak year
|-
||align=|26,854,|2023
|-
||align=|3,125,|2023
|-
||align=|2,385,|2023
|-
||align=|277,|2023
|-
||align=||545,|2021
|-
||align=|201,|2023
|-
||align=|178,|2023
|-
||align=|139,|2023
|-
||align=|137,|2023
|-
||align=|75,|2023
|}
{| class="wikitable" style="text-align: right; float:right; border:1px solid #aaa; margin:10px"
|- style="background:#dbdbdb;"
! Rank
! Country or territory
! GDP <small>(nominal, peak year)</small><br /><small>millions of USD</small>
! Peak year
|-
||align=|26,854,|2023
|-
||align=|2,139,|2022
|-
||align=||1,663,|2023
|-
||align=<ref>[https://databankfiles.worldbank.org/public/ddpext_download/GDP.pdf World Bank's GDP (Nominal) data for Cuba]</ref>||545,|2021
|-
||align=|121,|2023
|-
||align=||120,|2023
|-
||align=||102,|2023
|-
||align=||77,|2023
|-
||align=||77,|2023
|-
||align=||34,|2023
|}

North America's GDP per capita was evaluated in October 2016 by the International Monetary Fund (IMF) to be $41,830, making it the richest continent in the world,<ref name="IMFcapitaGDP"/> followed by Oceania.<ref name="cia-us"/>

Canada, Mexico, and the U.S. have significant and multifaceted economic systems. The U.S. has the largest economy of all three countries and in the world.<ref name="cia-us"></ref>

Canada shows significant growth in the sectors of services, mining and manufacturing.<ref name="cia-ca"></ref>

The North American economy is well defined and structured in three main economic areas.<ref name="UANL"></ref> These areas are those under the North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA), the Caribbean Community and Common Market (CARICOM), and the Central American Common Market (CACM).<ref name="UANL" /> Of these trade blocs, the U.S. takes part in two. In addition to the larger trade blocs there is the Canada-Costa Rica Free Trade Agreement among numerous other Free-free-trade relations, often between the larger, more developed countries and Central American and Caribbean countries.

NAFTA formed one of the four largest trade blocs in the world.<ref></ref> In 2018, the NAFTA was replaced by the U.S.–Mexico–Canada Agreement.

The Caribbean trade bloc (CARICOM) came into agreement in 1973 when it was signed by 15 Caribbean nations. As of 2000, CARICOM trade volume was US$96 billion. CARICOM also allowed for the creation of a common passport for associated nations. In the past decade the trade bloc focused largely on free-trade agreements and under the CARICOM Office of Trade Negotiations free-trade agreements have been signed into effect.

Integration of Central American economies occurred under the signing of the Central American Common Market agreement in 1961; this was the first attempt to engage the nations of this area into stronger financial cooperation. The 2006 implementation of the Central American Free Trade Agreement (CAFTA) left the future of the CACM unclear.<ref></ref> The Central American Free Trade Agreement was signed by five Central American countries, the Dominican Republic, and the U.S. The focal point of CAFTA is to create a free trade area similar to that of NAFTA. In addition to the U.S., Canada also has relations in Central American trade blocs.

These nations also take part in inter-continental trade blocs. Mexico takes a part in the G3 Free Trade Agreement with Colombia and Venezuela and has a trade agreement with the EU. The U.S. has proposed and maintained trade agreements under the Transatlantic Free Trade Area between itself and the European Union; the U.S.–Middle East Free Trade Area between numerous Middle Eastern nations and itself; and the Trans-Pacific Strategic Economic Partnership between Southeast Asian nations, Australia, and New Zealand.

 <span id="Infrastructure">Transport</span> 


The Pan-American Highway route in the Americas is the portion of a network of roads nearly .

The first transcontinental railroad in the U.S. was built in the 1860s, linking the railroad network of the eastern U.S. with California on the Pacific coast. Finished on 10 May 1869 at the famous golden spike event at Promontory Summit, Utah, it created a nationwide mechanized transportation network that revolutionized the population and economy of the U.S.American West, catalyzing the transition from the wagon trains of previous decades to a modern transportation system.<ref name="WDL"> of track by connecting Ontario with the Canadian Atlantic provinces west as far as Port Huron, Michigan, through Sarnia, Ontario.

 Communications 
A shared telephone system known as the North American Numbering Plan (NANP) is an integrated telephone numbering plan of 24 countries and territories: the U.S. and its territories, Canada, Bermuda, and 17 Caribbean nations.

 Culture 

The cultures of North America are diverse. The U.S. and English Canada have many cultural similarities, while French Canada has a distinct culture from Anglophone Canada, which is protected by law. Since the U.S. was formed from portions previously part of the Spanish Empire and then independent Mexico, and there has been considerable and continuing immigration of Spanish speakers from south of the U.S.–Mexico border. In the southwest of the U.S. there are many Hispanic cultural traditions and considerable bilingualism. Mexico and Central America are part of Latin America and are culturally distinct from anglophone and francophone North America. However, they share with the United States the establishment of post-independence governments that are federated representative republics with written constitutions dating from their founding as nations. Canada is a federated parliamentary democracy under a constitutional monarchy.

Canada's constitution dates to 1867, with confederation, in the British North America Act, but not until 1982 did Canada have the power to amend its own constitution. Canada's Francophone heritage has been enshrined in law since the British parliament passed the Quebec Act of 1774. In contrast to largely Protestant Anglo settlers in North America, French-speaking Canadians were Catholic and with the Quebec Act were guaranteed freedom to practice their religion, restored the right of the Catholic Church to impose tithes for its support, and established French civil law in most circumstances.

The distinctiveness of French language and culture has been codified in Canadian law, so that both English and French are designated official languages. The U.S. has no official language, but its national language is English.

The Canadian government took action to protect Canadian culture by limiting non-Canadian content in broadcasting, creating the Canadian Radio and Telecommunications Commission to monitor Canadian content. In Quebec, the provincial government established the Quebec Office of the French Language, often called the "language police" by Anglophones, which mandates the use of French terminology and signage in French.<ref>[https://www.theglobeandmail.com/opinion/yes-the-quebec-language-police-does-serve-a-purpose/article36329861/ "Yes, the Quebec language police does serve a purpose"]. Accessed 5 July 2021 </ref>

Latino culture is strong in the southwest of the U.S., as well as Florida, which draws Latin Americans from many countries in the hemisphere. Northern Mexico, particularly in the cities of Monterrey, Tijuana, Ciudad Juárez, and Mexicali, is strongly influenced by the culture and way of life of the U.S. Monterrey, a modern city with a significant industrial group, has been regarded as the most Americanized city in Mexico.<ref name="MonterreyFall"></ref> Northern Mexico, the Western U.S. and Alberta, Canada share a cowboy culture.

The Anglophone Caribbean states have witnessed and participated in the decline of the British Empire and its influence on the region, and its replacement by the economic influence of Northern America in the Anglophone Caribbean. This is partly due to the relatively small populations of the English-speaking Caribbean countries, and also because many of them now have more people living abroad than those remaining at home.

Greenland has experienced many immigration waves from Northern Canada, e.g. the Thule people. Therefore, Greenland shares some cultural ties with the indigenous peoples of Canada. Greenland is also considered Nordic and has strong Danish ties due to centuries of colonization by Denmark.<ref></ref>

 Popular culture – sports 
The U.S. and Canada have major sports teams that compete against each other, including baseball, basketball, hockey, and soccer/football. Canada, Mexico and the U.S. will host the 2026 FIFA World Cup.

The following table shows the most prominent sports leagues in North America, in order of average revenue.<ref>[http://fivethirtyeight.com/datalab/theres-a-big-five-in-north-american-pro-sports/ "The 'Big Five' in North American Pro Sports"] , Guardian.com, 12 March 2014.</ref> Canada has a separate Canadian Football League from the U.S. teams.

The Native American game of lacrosse is considered a national sport in Canada. Curling is an important winter sport in Canada, and the Winter Olympics includes it in the roster. The English sport of cricket is popular in parts of anglophone Canada and very popular in parts of the former British empire, but in Canada is considered a minor sport. Boxing is also a major sport in some countries, such as Mexico, Panama and Puerto Rico, and it is considered one of the main individual sports in the U.S.

{| class="wikitable sortable" style="text-align:center"
|-
!|| Primary<br />||| Revenue<br />US$| Average<br />attendance
|-
| align= National Football League| American football| align=||| $9.| 
|-
| align= Major League Baseball| Baseball| align= United States<br />||| $8.| 
|-
| align= National Basketball Association| Basketball| align= United States<br />||| $5.| 
|-
| align= National Hockey League| Ice hockey| align= United States<br />||| $3.| 
|-
| align= Liga MX|| Football (soccer)| align=||| $0.| 
|-
| align= Major League Soccer| Football (soccer)| align= United States<br />||| $0.| 
|-
| align= Canadian Football League| Canadian football| align=||| $0.| 
|}


 See also 
* Flags of North America
* List of cities in North America
* North American Union
* Outline of North America
* Table manners in North America

 References 
 Footnotes 


 Citations 


 Further reading 
  
*  
* 
*  
*   
*  
* 
* 
*  


 External links 
*    
*     
* [https://education.nationalgeographic.org/resource/north-america-human-geography North America: Human Geography] at the National Geographic Society 
* [https://education.nationalgeographic.org/resource/european-colonization-north-america European Colonization of North America] at the National Geographic Society 
*      
*  
* [http://www.columbiagazetteer.org/ The Columbia Gazetteer of the World Online] Columbia University Press 
*  
* Media:Non-Native American Nations Control over N America 1750-2008 SMIL.Interactive SVG version of Non-Native American Nations Control over N America 1750–2008 animation





{{Navboxes
|title = Articles related to North America 
|list = 




}} 



